ARROW-17954: [R] Update news for 10.0 (#14337)
apache/arrow: r/NEWS.md

  under the License.
-->

> # arrow 10.0.0

Reviewer: You don't need to edit this, the release preparation script will

```suggestion
# arrow 9.0.0.9000
```

> ## Arrays and tables

Reviewer: Can you move this to after the dplyr section?

  available when querying `?Dataset`);
* Five functions in the `slice_*` family: `dplyr::slice_min()`, 
  `dplyr::slice_max()`, `dplyr::slice_head()`, `dplyr::slice_tail()`, and
  `dplyr::slice_sample()`.

A full list of functions available in queries is available at `?acero`.

A few new features and bugfixes were implemented for joins.
Extension arrays are now supported in joins, allowing, for example, joining 
datasets that contain [geoarrow](https://paleolimbot.github.io/geoarrow/) data.
The `keep` argument is now supported, allowing separate columns for the left
and right hand side join keys in join output. Full joins now coalesce the 
join keys (when `keep = FALSE`), avoiding the issue where the join keys would 
be all `NA` for rows in the right hand side without any matches on the left.

A few breaking changes: Calling `dplyr::pull()` will return a `?ChunkedArray` 
instead of an R vector. Calling `dplyr::compute()` on a query that is grouped 
returns a `?Table`, instead of an query object.

Finally, long-running queries can now be cancelled and will abort their 
computation immediately.

## Reading and writing

> `write_feather()` can take `FALSE` to choose writing uncompressed files.

Reviewer: We need to list down here that we've bumped up to C++17, which has implications for Windows R < 4 and CentOS 7. I'm working on a PR with language you can borrow and link to.

Author: I've brought over some language from https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/14440

Reviewer: Great, thanks, LGTM

# arrow 9.0.0.9000

## Arrow dplyr queries

Several new functions can be used in queries: 

* `dplyr::across()` can be used to apply the same computation across multiple 
  columns;
* `add_filename()` can be used to get the filename a row came from (only 

>   available when querying `?Dataset`);

Author: Yes, in order to link to a class you have to put the `?`. It looks a little dumb, though.

A few new features and bugfixes were implemented for joins.
Extension arrays are now supported in joins, allowing, for example, joining 
datasets that contain [geoarrow](https://paleolimbot.github.io/geoarrow/) data.
The `keep` argument is now supported, allowing separate columns for the left
and right hand side join keys in join output. Full joins now coalesce the 
join keys (when `keep = FALSE`), avoiding the issue where the join keys would 
be all `NA` for rows in the right hand side without any matches on the left.

A few breaking changes: Calling `dplyr::pull()` will return a `?ChunkedArray` 
instead of an R vector. Calling `dplyr::compute()` on a query that is grouped 
returns a `?Table`, instead of an query object.

Finally, long-running queries can now be cancelled and will abort their 
computation immediately.

## Arrays and tables

`as_arrow_array()` can now take `blob::blob` and `?vctrs::list_of`, which
convert to binary and list arrays, respectively. Also fixed an issue where 
`as_arrow_array()` ignored type argument when passed a `StructArray`.

The `unique()` function works on `?Table`, `?RecordBatch`, `?Dataset`, and
`?RecordBatchReader`.

## Reading and writing

> `write_feather()` can take `FALSE` to choose writing uncompressed files.

Author: ```suggestion
`write_feather()` can take `FALSE` to choose writing uncompressed files.

Also, a breaking change for IPC files in `write_dataset()`: passing
`"ipc"` or  `"feather"` to `format` will now write files with `.arrow`
extension instead of `.feather`.
```

# arrow 9.0.0.9000

## Arrow dplyr queries

Several new functions can be used in queries: 

* `dplyr::across()` can be used to apply the same computation across multiple 
  columns;
* `add_filename()` can be used to get the filename a row came from (only 
  available when querying `?Dataset`);
* Added five functions in the `slice_*` family: `dplyr::slice_min()`, 
  `dplyr::slice_max()`, `dplyr::slice_head()`, `dplyr::slice_tail()`, and
  `dplyr::slice_sample()`.

> A full list of functions available in queries is available at `?acero`.

Author: ```suggestion
For a full list of functions available in queries see `?acero`.
```

A few new features and bugfixes were implemented for joins.
Extension arrays are now supported in joins, allowing, for example, joining 
datasets that contain [geoarrow](https://paleolimbot.github.io/geoarrow/) data.
The `keep` argument is now supported, allowing separate columns for the left
and right hand side join keys in join output. Full joins now coalesce the 
join keys (when `keep = FALSE`), avoiding the issue where the join keys would 
be all `NA` for rows in the right hand side without any matches on the left.

A few breaking changes: Calling `dplyr::pull()` will return a `?ChunkedArray` 
instead of an R vector. Calling `dplyr::compute()` on a query that is grouped 

> returns a `?Table`, instead of an query object.

Author: ```suggestion
returns a `?Table`, instead of a query object.
```

Finally, long-running queries can now be cancelled and will abort their 
computation immediately.

## Arrays and tables

`as_arrow_array()` can now take `blob::blob` and `?vctrs::list_of`, which
convert to binary and list arrays, respectively. Also fixed an issue where 
`as_arrow_array()` ignored type argument when passed a `StructArray`.

The `unique()` function works on `?Table`, `?RecordBatch`, `?Dataset`, and
`?RecordBatchReader`.

## Reading and writing

`write_feather()` can take `FALSE` to choose writing uncompressed files.

Also, a breaking change for IPC files in `write_dataset()`: passing
`"ipc"` or  `"feather"` to `format` will now write files with `.arrow`

> extension instead of `.feather`.

Reviewer 2: In the current version, if `"ipc"` is specified, the extension is `.ipc`, so perhaps the wording needs to be corrected?

Author: Are you sure about that?

https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/63e1756778c8c7f0cfcd3cfca6774cd30ffc6c9d/r/R/dataset-write.R#L137-L139

https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/63e1756778c8c7f0cfcd3cfca6774cd30ffc6c9d/r/tests/testthat/test-dataset-write.R#L169-L173

Author: ```suggestion
extension instead of `.ipc` or `.feather`.
```
